API docs: initial add of HHS COVIDcast source (#344)
cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata: docs/api/covidcast-signals/hhs.md

---
title: Department of Health & Human Services
parent: Data Sources and Signals
grand_parent: COVIDcast Epidata API
---

# SOURCE NAME
{: .no_toc}

* **Source name:** `hhs`
* **First issued:** TBD
* **Number of data revisions since 19 May 2020:** 0
* **Date of last change:** Never

> * **Available for:** county, hrr, msa, state (see [geography coding docs](../covidcast_geography.md))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Available for:** state (see [geography coding docs](../covidcast_geography.md))
```

Author: ```suggestion
* **Available for:** state, national (see [geography coding docs](../covidcast_geography.md))
```

Reviewer: does the indicator currently do nation? We add hhs and nation if we wanted

Author: not yet, but I think we should add them before the release.

it looks like GeoMapper only supports [fips,zip]->nation, would you take a look at how hard it would be to add a state->nation crosswalk?

Reviewer: think it should be pretty simple, ill work on it

* **Time type:** day (see [date format docs](../covidcast_times.md))
* **License:** [Open Data Commons Open Database License (ODbL)](https://opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/1-0/)

> The U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) publishes several
> datasets on patient impact and hospital capacity. Two of these
> datasets are mirrored in Epidata at the following endpoints:
> 
> * [COVID-19 Hospitalization: States](../covid_hosp.md) - daily resolution, state aggregates
> * [COVID-19 Hospitalization: Facilities](../covid_hosp_facilities.md) - weekly resolution, individual hospitals
> 
> Both datasets contain dozens of columns that break down hospital
> resource usage in different ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) publishes several
datasets on patient impact and hospital capacity. One of these
datasets is mirrored in Epidata at the following endpoint:

* [COVID-19 Hospitalization: States](../covid_hosp.md) - daily resolution, state aggregates

This dataset contain dozens of columns that break down hospital
resource usage in different ways.
```

This indicator makes available several commonly-used combinations of
those columns, aggregated geographically. In particular, we include
the sum of all adult and pediatric COVID-19 hospital admissions. This

> sum is used as the "ground truth" for hospitalizations by the (Reich

Author: ```suggestion
sum is used as the "ground truth" for hospitalizations by the [Reich
```

lab COVID-19 forecast

> hub](https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub/blob/master/data-processed/README.md#hospitalizations].

Author: ```suggestion
hub](https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub/blob/master/data-processed/README.md#hospitalizations).
```

> hub](https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub/blob/master/data-processed/README.md#hospitalizations).

Reviewer: @RoniRos is this still the case in light of the coverage/reporting issues?

Author: For state, yes. [Update in slack](https://delphi-org.slack.com/archives/C01GJCMFTN1/p1610634088000100?thread_ts=1610383099.021800&cid=C01GJCMFTN1)

Reviewer: :+1:

| Signal | Geography | Resolution | Description |

> | --- | --- |

Author: ```suggestion
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
```

| `confirmed_admissions_1d` | state | 1 day | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring each day. |
| `sum_confirmed_suspected_admissions_1d` | state | 1 day | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed and suspected COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring each day. |

> | `confirmed_admissions_7d` | county, hrr, msa, state | 7 days | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring over a span of 7 days. |
> | `sum_confirmed_suspected_admissions_7d` | county, hrr, msa, state | 7 days | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed and suspected COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring over a span of 7 days. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta}

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Estimation

### Statewise, daily resolution

Statewise daily resolution signals use the following four columns from
the HHS state timeseries dataset:

* `previous_day_admission_[adult|pediatric]_covid_[confirmed|suspected]`

The `confirmed` signal is the sum of the two `confirmed` columns: 

* adult
* pediatric

The `sum_confirmed_suspected` signal is the sum of all four columns:

* adult confirmed
* adult suspected
* pediatric confirmed
* pediatric suspected

The source data specifies that admissions occurred on the previous
day. We automatically adjust the date of each result so that
admissions are incident on that date.

> 
> ### Facilitywise, 7-day resolution
> 
> Facilitywise 7-day resolution signals use the following four columns
> from the HHS facilitywise dataset:
> 
> * `previous_day_admission_[adult|pediatric]_covid_[confirmed|suspected]_7_day_sum`
> 
> The `confirmed` signal is the sum of the two `confirmed` columns: 
> 
> * adult
> * pediatric
> 
> The `sum_confirmed_suspected` signal is the sum of all four columns:
> 
> * adult confirmed
> * adult suspected
> * pediatric confirmed
> * pediatric suspected
> 
> The source data specifies that admissions for the previous day are
> summed over a seven-day period starting with the collection date. We
> automatically adjust the date for each result so that admissions are
> incident to the seven day period starting with that date.
> 
> The source data uses an unusual week definition (originally
> Friday-Thursday; Thursday-Wednesday with our adjustment). Because this
> definition does not match that used by epiweeks, this dataset uses
> `time_type=day`. However, data will only ever be present for dates that
> are the start of a seven-day collection period (ie Thursdays).
> 
> Facility-wise data is aggregated to other geographies using the facility's FIPS
> code, if available, and the ZIP5 code of the facility otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

the sum of all adult and pediatric COVID-19 hospital admissions. This
sum is used as the "ground truth" for hospitalizations by the (Reich
lab COVID-19 forecast
hub](https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub/blob/master/data-processed/README.md#hospitalizations].

| Signal | Geography | Resolution | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `confirmed_admissions_1d` | state | 1 day | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring each day. |
| `sum_confirmed_suspected_admissions_1d` | state | 1 day | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed and suspected COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring each day. |
| `confirmed_admissions_7d` | county, hrr, msa, state | 7 days | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring over a span of 7 days. |
| `sum_confirmed_suspected_admissions_7d` | county, hrr, msa, state | 7 days | Sum of adult and pediatric confirmed and suspected COVID-19 hospital admissions occuring over a span of 7 days. |

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta}

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Estimation

### Statewise, daily resolution

Statewise daily resolution signals use the following four columns from

> the HHS state timeseries dataset:

Reviewer 2: Make "timeseries" either "time-series" or "time series".

Author: I happen to agree, but alas "timeseries" is the spelling established by the source:
https://healthdata.gov/dataset/covid-19-reported-patient-impact-and-hospital-capacity-state-timeseries

Reviewer 2: Ah in that case, ignore this suggestion!

* `previous_day_admission_[adult|pediatric]_covid_[confirmed|suspected]`

The `confirmed` signal is the sum of the two `confirmed` columns: 

* adult
* pediatric

The `sum_confirmed_suspected` signal is the sum of all four columns:

* adult confirmed
* adult suspected
* pediatric confirmed
* pediatric suspected

> The source data specfies that admissions occured on the previous

Reviewer 2: Correct spelling for "Specifies" and "Occurred"

Author: ```suggestion
The source data specifies that admissions occurred on the previous
```

day. We automatically adjust the date of each result so that
admissions are incident on that date.

### Facilitywise, 7-day resolution

Facilitywise 7-day resolution signals use the following four columns
from the HHS facilitywise dataset:

* `previous_day_admission_[adult|pediatric]_covid_[confirmed|suspected]_7_day_sum`

The `confirmed` signal is the sum of the two `confirmed` columns: 

* adult
* pediatric

The `sum_confirmed_suspected` signal is the sum of all four columns:

* adult confirmed
* adult suspected
* pediatric confirmed
* pediatric suspected

> The source data specfies that admissions for the previous day are

Reviewer 2: Correct spelling "Specifies"

Author: ```suggestion
The source data specifies that admissions for the previous day are
```

summed over a seven-day period starting with the collection date. We
automatically adjust the date for each result so that admissions are
incident to the seven day period starting with that date.

The source data uses an unusual week definition (originally
Friday-Thursday; Thursday-Wednesday with our adjustment). Because this
definition does not match that used by epiweeks, this dataset uses

> `time_type=day`, however data will only ever be present for dates that

Reviewer 2: Make another sentence start with "However," then restructure if it doesn't change meaning as "However, data will only ever be present for dates that start a seven-day collection period (i.e., Thursdays)."

Author: ```suggestion
`time_type=day`. However, data will only ever be present for dates that
```

are the start of a seven-day collection period (ie Thursdays).

Facilitywise data is aggregated to other geographies using the FIPS
code of the facility, if available, and the ZIP5 code of the facility

> otherwise.

Reviewer 2: Sentence restructure: "Facility-wise data is aggregated to other geographies using the facility's FIPS code, if available, and the ZIP5 code of the facility otherwise." 

Or keep Facilitywise if it's a title.

Author: ```suggestion
Facility-wise data is aggregated to other geographies using the facility's FIPS
code, if available, and the ZIP5 code of the facility otherwise.
```

## Limitations

TBD

## Lag and Backfill

TBD

## Source and Licensing

This indicator mirrors and lightly aggregates data originally
published by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services under an
[Open Data Commons Open Database License
(ODbL)](https://opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/1-0/). The ODbL

> permits sharing, transformation, and redistribution of data or derived

Reviewer 2: Restructure if it doesn't change meaning, "The ODbL permits sharing, transformation, and redistribution of data or derived works so long as all public uses are attributed and distributed under the ODbL."

Author: yeah i was worried that phrasing would attach "attributed" to "the ODbL". maybe "distributed under the ODbL and properly attributed"?

Reviewer 2: That would work. It reads a lot better that way.

> works so long as all public uses are attributed, and are likewise
> distributed under the ODbL. For more details, consult the official
> license text.

Author: ```suggestion
works so long as all public uses are distributed under the ODbL and 
attributed to the source. For more details, consult the official
license text.
```
